# `OutputPathGenerator`

The `OutputPathGenerator` module provides tools for preparing the directory
structure for your simulation output. This helps you organize your simulation
results efficiently and avoid overwriting existing data.

The module offers one function, `generate_output_path`. The function takes three
arguments:
- `output_path`: The base directory path for your simulation output.
- `style` (Optional): The desired style for output management (defaults to
  `ActiveLinkStyle`).
- `context` (Optional): the `ClimaComms.context`. This is required in MPI runs
  to ensure that all the MPI processes agree on the folder structure.

The function processes the `output_path` based on the chosen style and returns the
final path where you should write your simulation output.

You should use `generate_output_path` at the beginning of your simulation and
use the return value as the base directory where you save all the output your
code produces.

## Available Styles

The module currently offers two different styles for handling the output directory:

### `RemovePreexistingStyle` (Destructive)

This style directly uses the provided output_path as the final output directory.
Important: If a directory already exists at the specified path, it will be
removed completely (including any subfolders and files) without confirmation.
Use this style cautiously!

### `ActiveLinkStyle` (Non-Destructive)

This style provides a more convenient and non-destructive approach. It manages a
sequence of subfolders within the base directory specified by output_path. It
also creates a symbolic link named `output_active` that points to the current
active subfolder. This allows you to easily access the latest simulation
results.

#### `Example`

Let's assume your `output_path` is set to `data`.

* If `data` doesn't exist, the module creates it and returns `data/output_0000`.
  In doing this, a link `data/output_active` to `data/output_0000` is created so
  that you can always access your data in `data/output_active`.
*  If `data` exists and contains an `output_active` link pointing to
  `data/output_0005`, `output_active` is updated to point to a new subfolder
  called `data/output_0006`
* If `data` exists with or without an `output_active` link, the module checks
  for existing subfolders named `data/output_XXXX` (with `XXXX` a number). If
  none are found, it creates `data/output_0000` and a link `data/output_active`
  pointing to it.

#### A note for Windows users

Windows does not always allow the creation of symbolic links by unprivileged
users, so some details about links might be slightly different depending on your
system. If you are using Windows, please have a look at docstring on the
`ActiveLinkStyle` to learn more about possible differences.


## Restarting from previous outputs with `ActiveLinkStyle`

`ClimaUtilities` provides a helper function, `detect_restart_file`, that can
help you automatically locate the most recent restart file generated by your
simulation.

This function is useful if you want to restart a simulation from a previous
checkpoint. It works with the `ActiveLinkStyle` described above.

To find the most recent restart file, just call

```julia
restart_file = detect_restart_file(output_path; style)
```
where style has to be `ActiveLinkStyle` object and `output_path` is the base
directory where your simulation output is stored (the same one you passed to
`generate_output_path`). Passing the `style` is optional, if no `style` is passed,
``

The function will scan the subfolders within output_path (e.g.,
`output_path/output_0001`, `output_path/output_0002`, etc.) and return the path
to the most recent restart file it finds. If no restart file is found, it will
return `nothing`.

You can customize the search for restart files by passing optional arguments to
`detect_restart_file`:

`restart_file_rx`: A regular expression to match the names of your restart
files. The default is `r"day\d+\.\w+\.hdf5"`.

`sort_func`: A function to sort the restart files and select the most recent
one. The default is `ClimaUtilities.sort_by_creation_time`, which sorts files
based on their creation time. You can provide a custom function if you want to
sort by a different criterion (e.g., the simulation time stored within the HDF5
file).

## API

```@docs
ClimaUtilities.OutputPathGenerator.generate_output_path
ClimaUtilities.OutputPathGenerator.RemovePreexistingStyle
ClimaUtilities.OutputPathGenerator.ActiveLinkStyle
ClimaUtilities.OutputPathGenerator.detect_restart_file
```
